
			  License Agreement

   The mapSoN software both binary and source (hereafter "Software"),
is intellectual property owned jointly by Peter Simons and German
National Research Center for Information Technology (hereafter "GMD")
and is copyrighted by GMD in all countries in the world, and ownership
remains with GMD.

   GMD grants you (hereafter "Licensee") a license to use the Software
for academic, research and internal business purposes only, without a
fee. Only for these purposes, Licensee may distribute the binary and
source code (if released) to third parties provided that the copyright
notice and this statement appears on all copies and that no charge is
associated with such copies.

   Licensee may make derivative works. However, if Licensee distributes
any derivative work based on or derived from the Software, then Licensee
will

  1. notify GMD regarding its distribution of the derivative work, and

  2. clearly notify users that such derivative work is a modified
     version and not the original mapSoN distributed by GMD.


   Any Licensee wishing to make commercial use of the Software should
contact GMD, to negotiate an appropriate license for such commercial
use. Commercial use includes

  1. integration of all or part of the source code into a product for
     sale or license by or on behalf of Licensee to third parties;

  2. any distribution of the binary code or source code to third
     parties that need it to utilize a commercial product sold or
     licensed by or on behalf of Licensee;

  3. any distribution of the binary code or source code to third
     parties for a licence fee;

  4. any distribution of the binary code or source code through such
     formats as diskette or CD-ROM.


   The Licensee acknowledges and agrees that the software is delivered
'as is' without warranty and without any support services. GMD makes no
warranties, either expressed or implied, as to the software and its
derivatives.

   It is understood by the Licensee that GMD shall not be liable for any
loss or damage that may arise, including any indirect special or
consequential loss or damage in connection with or arising from the
performance or use of the software, including fitness for any particular
purpose.

   By using or copying this Software, Licensee agrees to abide by the
copyright law and all other applicable laws of Germany including, but
not limited to, export control laws, and the terms of this license. GMD
shall have the right to terminate this license immediately by written
notice upon Licensee's breach of, or non-compliance with, any of its
terms. Licensee may be held legally responsible for any copyright
infringement that is caused or encouraged by Licensee's failure to abide
by the terms of this license.
